>> Thompson: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SUNDAY, MAY 8:
THE WILDFIRE IN CANADA CONTINUES
TO GROW, NOW COVERING MORE THAN
800 SQUARE MILES.
IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
BROADWAY'S "HAMILTON,"
TRANSFORMING THE WAY HISTORY IS
TAUGHT TO INNER CITY STUDENTS.
>> ♪ HE RESIDED IN ST. CROIX, HE
WAS JUST A LITTLE BOY DEPLOYED
♪ INTO THE WORLD TRYING TO
DISCOVER JOY
>> Thompson: AND, WHY THE WORLD
IS WATCHING THE PHILIPPINES ON
THE EVE OF ITS PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTION.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
MEGAN THOMPSON.
>> Thompson: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THAT MONSTROUS WILDFIRE IN THE
PROVINCE OF ALBERTA, CANADA, HAS
EXPANDED TO COVER ALMOST 800
SQUARE MILES, AN AREA THE SIZE
OF MEXICO CITY, AND IT'S
EXPECTED TO GROW EVEN FURTHER.
BUT THERE'S A 70% CHANCE OF RAIN
IN THE AREA TONIGHT, WHICH COULD
GIVE FIREFIGHTERS SOME
DESPERATELY NEEDED HELP.
THE FIRE HAS WIPED OUT THE TOWN
OF FORT McMURRAY, AND ALMOST
100,000 RESIDENTS OF THE TOWN
AND SURROUNDING AREAS HAVE BEEN
FORCED TO EVACUATE, TO EDMONTON,
CALGARY, AND OTHER CITIES.
HUNDREDS OF STRUCTURES IN FORT
McMURRAY HAVE BURNED TO THE
GROUND.
500 FIREFIGHTERS HAVE BEEN
BATTLING THE BLAZE AROUND THE
CLOCK.
SOME HAVEN'T SLEPT IN DAYS.
>> I DON'T CONSIDER MYSELF A
HERO.
BUT I'VE MET MORE HEROES IN THIS
EXPERIENCE THAN I'VE EVER
THOUGHT EXISTED.
>> Thompson: HUNDREDS OF FORT
McMURRAY RESIDENTS WORKED AT THE
LARGE TAR SANDS OIL FACILITY
NORTH OF THE CITY, WHERE IT'S
ESTIMATED THE DAILY CRUDE OIL
OUTPUT HAS BEEN CUT IN HALF,
THOUGH THE FACILITY IS NOT
DIRECTLY THREATENED BY THE FIRE.
NORTH KOREAN LEADER KIM JONG UN
IS RENOUNCING A FIRST STRIKE
NUCLEAR ATTACK AND SAYS HE WOULD
LAUNCH A NUCLEAR WEAPON ONLY IN
SELF-DEFENSE.
IN A THREE-HOUR SPEECH TO HIS
WORKER'S PARTY CONGRESS IN
PYONGYANG, KIM VOWED THE NORTH
WOULD NOT USE ITS NUCLEAR
WEAPONS UNLESS, AS HE PUT IT,"
AGGRESSIVE HOSTILE FORCES USE
NUCLEAR WEAPONS TO INVADE OUR
SOVEREIGNTY."
NORTH KOREA STAGED ITS FOURTH
NUCLEAR WEAPONS TEST IN JANUARY.
KIM CALLED FOR CLOSER TIES WITH
SOUTH KOREA, AND SAID THE NORTH
IS READY FOR TALKS ON
NORMALIZING RELATIONS WITH OTHER
"HOSTILE" COUNTRIES.
KIM ALSO ANNOUNCED A NEW FIVE-
YEAR ECONOMIC PLAN TO BOOST
NORTH KOREA'S MANUFACTURING AND
AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION AND TO
INCREASE ITS INTERNATIONAL
TRADE.
THE GOVERNMENT OF AFGHANISTAN
INITIATED A NEW, HARD-LINE
POLICY TOWARD THE RESURGENT
TALIBAN TODAY BY EXECUTING SIX
PRISONERS CONVICTED OF TERRORISM
OFFENSES, INCLUDING
ASSASSINATING GOVERNMENT
OFFICIALS.
THE SIX WERE HANGED AT A PRISON
OUTSIDE THE CAPITAL OF KABUL.
THEY WERE THE FIRST EXECUTIONS
APPROVED BY AFGHAN PRESIDENT
ASHRAF GHANI SINCE HE TOOK
OFFICE TWO YEARS AGO.
FOLLOWING LAST MONTH'S SUICIDE
BOMBING IN KABUL THAT KILLED 64
PEOPLE, GHANI VOWED TO "SHOW NO
MERCY" TOWARD TALIBAN
TERRORISTS.
THE TALIBAN SAID IT WOULD AVENGE
TODAY'S HANGINGS.
IT CONTROLS MORE TERRITORY IN
AFGHANISTAN THAN AT ANY TIME
SINCE IT WAS DRIVEN FROM POWER
BY U.S.-LED FORCES IN 2001.
AFGHAN OFFICIALS SAY SPEEDING TO
AVOID TALIBAN CHECKPOINTS MAY
HAVE LED TO TODAY'S FATAL
COLLISION OF TWO BUSES AND A
FUEL TRUCK IN A PROVINCE WHERE
THE TALIBAN IS ACTIVE.
ALL THREE VEHICLES BURST INTO
FLAMES AND OFFICIALS SAY MORE
THAN 70 PEOPLE DIED, MANY OF
THEM CHILDREN.
THE U.S. MILITARY ACADEMY AT
WEST POINT IS INVESTIGATING IF A
PHOTOGRAPH OF BLACK FEMALE
CADETS VIOLATES RESTRICTIONS ON
POLITICAL ACTIVITY BY MILITARY
PERSONNEL.
THE PRE-GRADUATION PHOTO TAKEN
10 DAYS AGO SHOWS 16 UNIFORMED
CADETS WITH THEIR CLENCHED FISTS
RAISED, WHICH SOME INTERPRET AS
EXPRESSING SUPPORT FOR THE BLACK
LIVES MATTER MOVEMENT.
BUT A WEST POINT GRAD WHO IS A
FRIEND OF THE GROUP SAYS THE
GESTURES WERE INTENDED ONLY AS A
SIGN OF UNITY AND CELEBRATION.
THE 16 WOMEN IN THE PHOTO
REPRESENT ALL BUT ONE OF THE
BLACK FEMALE CADETS SCHEDULED TO
GRADUATE WEST POINT IN TWO
WEEKS.
>> Thompson: THE EAST AFRICAN
NATION OF SOMALIA HAS BEEN
PLAGUED BY CIVIL WAR FOR THE
PAST 25 YEARS, AND FOR THE PAST
DECADE, THE FLEDGLING GOVERNMENT
HAS BEEN FIGHTING AN INSURGENCY
BY THE RADICAL ISLAMIC AL QAEDA
AFFILIATE AL-SHABAB.
NOW, A NEW REPORT REVEALS
SOMALIA MAY BE USING CHILDREN AS
YOUNG AS 10-YEARS-OLD TO SPY ON
AL-SHABAAB OPERATIVES.
TODAY'S "WASHINGTON POST" SAYS
USING CHILD INFORMANTS IS NOT
ONLY DANGEROUS, BUT COULD BE A
VIOLATION OF INTERNATIONAL LAW.
THE "POST'S" DEPUTY FOREIGN
EDITOR MARY BETH SHERIDAN JOINS
ME NOW FROM WASHINGTON, D.C.
THANK YOU SO MUCH
FOR JOINING US.
FIRST THING STARTING OUT CAN YOU
JUST EXPLAIN HOW DOES SOMETHING
LIKE THIS HAPPEN?
HOW ARE CHILDREN FORCED TO BE
INFORMANTS FOR THE GOVERNMENT?
>> IT'S AN AMAZING STORY, I HAVE
TO SAY.
IN MANY CASES IN RECENT YEARS
THE GOVERNMENT HAS EITHER
MANAGED TO CAPTURE AL-SHABAAB
TROOPS WHO WERE FORCED BY THEM
TO FIGHT.
OR CHILDREN ACTUALLY GAVE
THEMSELVES UP, TRIED TO ESCAPE
AND WHAT IS SUPPOSED TO HAPPEN
IS THE GOVERNMENT IS SUPPOSED TO
TURN THESE KIDS OVER TO U.N.
AUTHORITIES OR OTHER
HUMANITARIAN GROUPS TO BE
REHABILITATED.
BUT INSTEAD OUR REPORTER KEVIN
FOUND THEY DETAINED A LOT OF
THEM AND FORCED THEM TO GO OUT
ON VERY DANGEROUS MISSIONS AND
POINT OUT FORMER COLLEAGUES,
OTHERWISE I'D TIE AL-SHABAB
INSTALLATION OR MEMBERS 3/4 YOUR
STORY DESCRIBES --
>> Thompson: ARE.
>> Thompson: FORCED TO WALK
PUBLICLY IN THE STREETS AND
IDENTIFY THEM.
WHAT KIND OF DANGER DOES THAT
PUT THAT IN?
>> A HUGE AMOUNT.
THE KIDS TOLD YOU, KEVIN
INTERVIEWED EIGHT OF THEM AND
TALKED TO RELIEF WORKERS AND SO
ON THAT THE KIDS' FACES WERE NO
NOT COVERED AND HOME
NEIGHBORHOODS.
SO PEOPLE KNOW WHO THEY ARE.
THESE KIDS ARE NOW VERY
FRIGHTENED BOTH THEY AND OTHER
PEOPLE TOLD US THEY MAY HAVE TO
BE RELOCATED.
THEY REALLY FACE GRAVE RISK OF
OF BEING KILLED.
>> Thompson: WHY IS CHILDREN
AT ALL FOR THIS?
ARE THEY MORE EASILY MANIPULATED
OR SOME SAY SOMETHING GREATER
ABOUT THE STATE OF THE
INTELLIGENCE.
>> WE TALKED TO INTELLIGENCE
OFFICIALS, THESE KIDS WERE PART
OF AL-SHABAB SOME HAD ACCESS TO
THE LEADERS, THEY HAD BEEN CAT
ANTS -- COMBATANTS THEY
JUSTIFIED THEIR BEHAVIOR.
KIDS TOLD US MAYBE MORE
MALLEABLE.
IT IS A VIOLATION OF
INTERNATIONAL LAW IN SOME CASES
IT'S A WAR CRIME.
>> Thompson: THE U.S.
SUPPORTS SOMALIA'S FIGHT AGAINST
AL-SHABAB WHAT KIND OF QUESTIONS
DOES THIS RAISE ABOUT U.S.
GOVERNMENT KNOWS ABOUT THE
SITUATION OR DID IT CONDONE
THIS?
>> WE WERE TOLD THAT THE A
PROVIDES SUBSTANTIAL FUNDING AND
TRAINING FOR THE SOMALIAN
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY.
THE CIA WOULDN'T RESPOND TO OUR
QUESTIONS ABOUT THEIR
INVOLVEMENT.
BUT SOMALIA OFFICIALS TOLD US
THE CIA KNOWS EVERYTHING WE'RE
DOING.
THE U.S. GOVERNMENT KNOWS THAT
SOMALIA HAS USED CHILD SOLDIERS,
WHICH IS A SLIGHTLY DIFFERENT
THING.
AND THAT'S BEEN A HUGE ISSUE,
THERE'S A LAW AGAINST PROVIDING
MILITARY AID TO COUNTRIES THAT
USE CHILD SOLDIERS, THERE'S A
WEAVER SOME TIME FOR NATIONAL
SECURITY REASONS.
THERE IS A REAL QUESTION OF HOW
MUCH THE CIA HAD OBSERVED OR IS
AWARE OF WHAT IS REAL HUMAN
RIGHTS ABUSE.
>> Thompson: WHAT HAPPENS NOW
FOR THESE KIDS?
IS ANYTHING BEING DONE TO END
THIS PRACTICE, ALSO HAS
SOMALI GOVERNMENT SAD ANYTHING
ABOUT THIS.
>> FOR A NUMBER OF YEARS THE
KIDS WERE KEPT IN A CENTER WHERE
THERE WAS LITTLE OR NO ACCESS TO
OUTSIDERS.
TRY TO FEEL WHAT WAS GO WILLING
ON WITH THE KIDS HAD A TOUGH
TIME GETTING IN.
AS OF COUPLE OF MONTHS AGO, A
LOT OF THE KIDS WERE TRANSFERRED
TO A CENTER WHERE THEY ARE
GETTING REHABILITATION, NO
LONGER BEING USED AS INFORMANTS.
BUT WHAT WE WERE TOLD THAT WE
THINK THE PRACTICE -- OR AID
WORKERS AND OTHERS THINK THE
PRACTICE ACTUALLY CONTINUES AND
THERE IS OTHER CHILDREN STILL
BEING USED AS INFORMANTS.
>> Thompson: ALL RIGHT.
TROUBLING STORY.
THANK YOU SO MUCH, MARY BETH
SHERIDAN FROM THE "WASHINGTON
POST."
>> THANK YOU.
>> Thompson: THIS WEEK, THE
BROADWAY SMASH HIT "HAMILTON"
WAS NOMINATED FOR A RECORD 16
TONY AWARDS, INCLUDING, AS
EXPECTED, BEST NEW MUSICAL.
THE SHOW'S CREATOR, LIN MANUEL
MIRANDA, WAS INDIVIDUALLY
NOMINATED FOR THREE TONY'S,
INCLUDING BEST PERFORMANCE BY AN
ACTOR IN A LEADING ROLE IN A
MUSICAL."
HAMILTON" HAS GROSSED
$70 MILLION, AND TICKETS ARE
NEARLY IMPOSSIBLE TO GET.
BUT A SELECT GROUP OF NEW YORK
CITY HIGH SCHOOL STUDENTS ARE
SEEING "HAMILTON" AND GETTING
FACE TIME WITH MIRANDA.
IT'S A NEW EDUCATIONAL PROGRAM
THAT CONNECTS THE STAGE AND THE
CLASSROOM WITH PLANS TO EXPAND
IT TO OTHER CITIES WHEN
"HAMILTON'S" NATIONAL TOUR
BEGINS LATER THIS YEAR.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
THE NEWSHOUR'S SASKIA DE MELKER
HAS THE STORY.
>> Reporter: "HAMILTON" IS ABOUT
THE PERSONAL AND POLITICAL LIVES
OF ALEXANDER HAMILTON AND
AMERICA'S OTHER FOUNDING
FATHERS.
>> ♪ MOVED IN WITH A COUSIN,
THE COUSIN COMMITTED SUICIDE,
♪ LEFT HIM WITH NOTHING
BUT RUINED PRIDE
>> Reporter: IT STARS A CAST OF
MOSTLY BLACK AND LATINO ACTORS
PERFORMING A MUSICAL SCORE
STEEPED IN HIP-HOP AND RAP.
THE SHOW IS SOLD OUT THROUGH
JANUARY 2017, WITH BOX OFFICE
TICKETS OFTEN COSTING HUNDREDS
OF DOLLARS APIECE.
BUT NOW, 20,000 STUDENTS FROM
NEW YORK CITY PUBLIC SCHOOLS
SERVING LOW INCOME POPULATIONS
WILL SEE THE SHOW, FOR JUST
$10 EACH.
THE SHOW'S PRODUCERS AND THE
ROCKEFELLER FOUNDATION ARE
UNDERWRITING THE COST.
>> ♪ ALEXANDER HAMILTON
MY NAME IS ALEXANDER HAMILTON
♪ AND THERE'S A MILLION THINGS
I HAVEN'T DONE, BUT JUST YOU
♪ WAIT, JUST YOU WAIT
>> Reporter: HAMILTON IS PLAYED
BY LIN-MANUEL MIRANDA, WHO ALSO
WROTE THE MUSIC AND LYRICS.
>> NOT EVERY STUDENT WHO COMES
TO SEE THE SHOW IS GOING TO HAVE
A LIFE IN THE THEATER.
BUT THEY ARE GOING TO HAVE TO
RECKON WITH HOW MUCH HAMILTON
GOT DONE IN HIS LIFE.
AND THAT IS GOING TO SPARK A
LITTLE BIT OF, "WELL, WHAT AM I
GOING TO DO WITH MY LIFE?"
>> Reporter: WHEN THE STUDENTS
ATTEND THEIR WEDNESDAY MATINEE,
IT IS THE CULMINATION OF A
LARGER EDUCATIONAL INITIATIVE.
>> SO GO TO YOUR RESEARCH ON
EITHER PAGE 16 OR 17.
>> Reporter: IT STARTS WITH AN
INTERACTIVE STUDY CURRICULUM BY
THE GILDER LEHRMAN INSTITUTE OF
AMERICAN HISTORY.
OVER SEVERAL WEEKS, THESE 11th
GRADERS SCROLL THROUGH TIMELINES
OF MAJOR EVENTS; WATCH VIDEO
CLIPS OF THE MUSICAL'S ACTORS
EXPLAINING HISTORICAL
WRITINGS...
>> SO THIS IS A LETTER THAT
LAFAYETTE WROTE TO HAMILTON.
>> Reporter: ...AND LISTEN TO
LYRICS, TO SEE HOW THEY
INCORPORATE HISTORICAL
DOCUMENTS.
>> ♪ WHEN WE FINALLY DROVE THE
BRITISH AWAY, LAFAYETTE IS THERE
WAITING IN CHESAPEAKE BAY!
>> WHAT DID YOU LEARN THAT IS
ABSOLUTELY ESSENTIAL TO TELLING
YOUR STORY?
>> Reporter: HISTORY TEACHER
PAUL ZUPPELLO TEACHES AT A HIGH
SCHOOL IN MANHATTAN.
HE BELIEVES USING THE MUSICAL
SHOWS HIS STUDENTS THAT HISTORY
IS MORE THAN JUST NAMES AND
DATES.
>> THIS HAS REALLY HELPED THEM
UNDERSTAND THAT IF YOU VIEW
HISTORY AS A NARRATIVE, YOU
ALMOST DON'T NEED TO WORRY ABOUT
REMEMBERING THE NITTY-GRITTY.
YOU'LL REMEMBER THOSE THINGS
BECAUSE YOU'RE GOING TO REMEMBER
THE STORY.
>> ♪ AND HE WROTE HIS FIRST
REFRAIN, A TESTAMENT TO HIS PAIN
>> Reporter: WHAT DID YOU KNOW
ABOUT ALEXANDER HAMILTON BEFORE
YOU STARTED LEARNING ABOUT HIM
THROUGH THE MUSICAL AND THROUGH
THE CURRICULUM AT SCHOOL?
>> I KNEW HE WAS ON THE $10.
AND I KNEW HE WAS TREASURY
SECRETARY FOR GEORGE WASHINGTON.
AND THAT'S IT.
>> Reporter: AT BRONX
ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY
ACADEMY, MALCOLM GRANT,
CHRISTIAN GOWAN, AND DANNY
INGRASSIA SPENT SEVERAL WEEKS
IMMERSED IN THE SUBJECT.
>> WHEN I WAS INTRODUCED TO
THIS, I WAS LIKE HISTORY ON
HAMILTON, I WASN'T REALLY
INTERESTED THAT MUCH.
BUT THEN YOU KNOW, YOU TAKE A
FEELING OF WHAT WE HAVE TODAY IN
THIS GENERATION, AND THEN ADD
THAT TO SOMETHING THAT'S
CENTURIES AGO WITH HAMILTON AND
OUR FOUNDING FATHERS.
AND THAT'S VERY INTERESTING.
>> I ENJOY MUSIC A LOT, MAINLY
HIP HOP AND RAP AND EVERYTHING.
SO HAVING IT BE DISPLAYED TO ME
THIS WAY.
IT STUCK IN MY HEAD.
>> ANYTHING WITH A HIP HOP,
FLAVOR TO IT, IT'S DEFINITELY
MORE INTERESTING THAN OPENING A
DUSTY HISTORY BOOK AND TRYING
TO, LIKE, FISH OUT OLD
INFORMATION.
>> THEY FEEL LIKE WHAT WE DO
HERE IS SORT OF OUTDATED.
>> Reporter: DANA HOLNESS IS
THEIR ENGLISH TEACHER.
>> AND GIVING THE KIDS THOSE
KIND OF OPTIONS JUST TO ME MAKES
EDUCATION SEEM RELEVANT.
>> Reporter: AFTER ENGAGING WITH
THE HAMILTON MATERIAL, THE
CURRICULUM HONES THE KIDS'
LANGUAGE, WRITING, AND
PERFORMANCE SKILLS BY HAVING
THEM WRITE THEIR OWN MUSICAL
RIFFS.
>> YEAH, IT'S TRUE THAT
JEFFERSON WAS SECOND PRESIDENT,
BUT IT'S ONLY BECAUSE HAMILTON
DIDN'T HAVE THE RESIDENCE.
>> LET'S TRY IT AGAIN.
SO, GO BACK.
CHRISTIAN, DO YOUR LAST FOUR
LINES.
>> AND THE GOVERNMENT WAS ROTTEN
TO THE CORE, SO THE PEOPLE
SPARKED A REVOLUTIONARY WAR.
>> WE BROKE IT UP INTO THREE
SEPARATE PARTS.
AND MINE, MY PART IS MORE
DIRECTED ON HIS INFLUENCE ON THE
BANK AND AMERICA DEVELOPING AT
THE TIME.
>> IT WASN'T JUST FOR THE FACT
THAT I GET TO LEARN ABOUT A
FOUNDING FATHER, IT WAS MAINLY I
GET TO EXPAND MY HORIZON, DO
SOMETHING I NEVER THOUGHT I'D DO
IN MY LIFETIME.
>> HE RESIDED IN ST. CROIX, HE
WAS JUST A LITTLE BOY DEPLOYED
INTO THE WORLD TRYING TO
DISCOVER JOY.
>> HE'S EXCITED TO HAVE A VOICE,
WHICH IS THE SAME THING THAT
THOSE MEN WANTED.
THEY WANTED A VOICE.
I THINK IT'S BEEN REALLY COOL TO
JUST SEE THEM, LIKE, ENJOY
SCHOOL, ENJOY THE CREATIVE
PROCESS.
>> Reporter: FOR LIN-MANUEL
MIRANDA, BRIDGING THE CLASSROOM
AND THE STAGE IS NOTHING NEW.
13 YEARS AGO, BEFORE HIS ACTING
CAREER TOOK OFF, HE WAS A 7th
GRADE ENGLISH TEACHER AT THE NEW
YORK PUBLIC SCHOOL HE ATTENDED.
HOW DID YOUR EXPERIENCE AS A
TEACHER INFLUENCE HOW YOU SEE
HAMILTON BEING USED IN THE
CLASSROOM?
>> I'VE LEARNED ALL OF MY BEST
TEACHING EXPERIENCES WHEN I WAS
SITTING IN THE BACK, AND I WAS
JUST KEEPING THE BALL IN THE AIR
FOR THE STUDENTS TO DISCUSS.
AND THEY WERE FINDING THE
CONNECTIONS IN WHATEVER WE WERE
READING OR WHATEVER WE WERE
LEARNING ABOUT.
AND THIS-- THIS CURRICULUM WORKS
IN A SIMILAR WAY.
IT'S NOT ABOUT, "HERE ARE THE
FACTS OF HAMILTON, THE MUSICAL.
PUT THEM IN YOUR BRAIN."
IT'S, "THIS IS ONE STORY.
WHAT ARE MORE STORIES?
WHAT ARE MORE STORIES FROM THIS
TIME, FROM THIS ERA?"
MAYBE STORIES THAT HAVEN'T BEEN
HEARD YET.
>> ♪ AND EVERY DAY WHILE SLAVES
WERE BEING SLAUGHTERED AND
♪ CARTED AWAY ACROSS THE WAVES,
HE STRUGGLED AND KEPT HIS GUARD
UP,
♪ INSIDE, HE WAS LONGING FOR
SOMETHING TO BE A PART OF,
♪ THE BROTHER WAS READY TO BEG,
STEAL, BORROW, OR BARTER
>> Reporter: ON THE DAY THEY
WENT TO THE SHOW, THE STUDENTS
INTERACTED WITH THE CAST.
CHRISTOPHER JACKSON PLAYS GEORGE
WASHINGTON.
>> YOU'VE GOT TO READ ABOUT OUR
FOREFATHERS SO THAT YOU KNOW,
YOU CAN APPRECIATE WHAT THEY DID
RIGHT AND TRY TO IMPROVE UPON
WHAT THEY DIDN'T GET RIGHT.
>> Reporter: AND A GROUP OF
STUDENTS FROM EACH PARTICIPATING
SCHOOL GOT TO PERFORM ITS PIECE
ON STAGE, IN FRONT OF LIN-MANUEL
MIRANDA.
THERE WAS A RAP FROM THE
PERSPECTIVE OF HAMILTON'S
NEMESIS, AARON BURR.
>> ♪ I TOOK HIM DOWN, GOT A
POSITION AT THE SEAT OF CONGRESS
♪ I JOINED THE CONTINENTAL ARMY,
I'M THE MAN IN PROGRESS
>> Reporter: THERE WAS A SONG
ABOUT THE BOSTON TEA PARTY.
>> ♪ SO WE TOOK THEIR TEA AND
DUMPED IT INTO THE SEA
>> HAVE A BLAST GUYS.
WE CAN'T WAIT TO SEE WHAT YOU'VE
MADE.
>> Reporter: AND THE TRIO FROM
BRONX ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY
ACADEMY GOT THEIR SHOT.
>> WE WANT TO WELCOME MALCOLM
GRANT, CHRISTIAN GOWAN, AND
DANIEL INGRASSIA!
COME ON OUT FELLAS!
>> ♪ ALEXANDER HAMILTON, LEGEND,
MAN, MYTH
♪ BASTARD ABANDONED WHEN HE WAS
JUST A LITTLE KID
♪ LIVING WITH HIS MOTHER, STRONG
BEFALLEN UNDER, FATHER DIDN'T
♪ KEEP IT COVERED SO HE ALSO HAD
A BROTHER
♪ RESIDED IN ST. CROIX, HE WAS
JUST A LITTLE BOY, DEPLOYED INTO
♪ THE WORLD TRYING TO DISCOVER
JOY
>> Reporter: HOW MUCH OF THIS IS
ABOUT STUDENTS WHO MAYBE DON'T
ALWAYS GET THAT CHANCE TO BE PUT
OUT THERE AND BE HEARD?
>> IT'S EVERYTHING.
THAT ABILITY TO BE HEARD WHETHER
IT'S IN A CLASSROOM OR IT'S ON A
STAGE, IT'S SO IMPORTANT.
THAT CREATIVITY.
IT'S IMPORTANT TO HARNESS IT AND
FIND OUTLETS FOR IT THAT ARE
CONSTRUCTIVE.
>> Reporter: FOR STUDENTS LIKE
DANNY INGRASSIA, THE LESSONS
FROM "HAMILTON" ARE PERSONAL.
>> HIS FATHER WALKED OUT ON HIM.
I MEAN, LIKE, MY FATHER PASSED
AWAY WHEN I WAS TEN YEARS OLD.
SO I MEAN THAT DEFINITELY
RESONATES WITH ME AND IT'S
COMFORTING TO KNOW THAT PEOPLE
THROUGHOUT HISTORY, NOT ONLY
HAMILTON, BUT MANY CHARACTERS,
HAVE, YOU KNOW, OVERCOME A LOT
OF OBSTACLES.
>> ♪ THE TEN DOLLAR FOUNDING
FATHER WITHOUT A FATHER GOT A
♪ LOT FARTHER BY WORKING A LOT
HARDER, BY BEING A LOT SMARTER,
♪ BY BEING A SELF-STARTER, BY
14, THEY PLACED HIM IN CHARGE OF
♪ A TRADING CHARTER
>> Reporter: THE "HAMILTON"
EDUCATION PROGRAM IS ALSO TRYING
TO INCREASE DIVERSITY AT THE
THEATER.
LAST YEAR, 80% OF THE BROADWAY
AUDIENCE WAS WHITE, WITH AN
AVERAGE AGE IN THE MID-40'S.
THE BOYS FROM BRONX ENGINEERING
AND TECHNOLOGY ACADEMY WERE PART
OF THE VERY FIRST STUDENT
AUDIENCE.
THE INITIATIVE TO INTEGRATE THE
SHOW INTO CLASSROOM STUDIES WILL
CONTINUE INTO THE FALL.
>> IT FORCES YOU TO ENGAGE
PERSONALLY WITH SOMETHING THAT
COULD JUST BE A BUNCH OF FACTS
YOU LEARN FOR AN A.P. TEST.
AND IN DOING THAT, YOU CREATE
EMPATHY.
IN DOING THAT, YOU CREATE AN
ABILITY TO ENGAGE WITH HISTORY
IN A WAY THAT'S MORE THAN
MEMORIZATION.
IT'S, "THESE WERE PEOPLE WHO
LIVED AND DIED.
AND THEY WERE FLAWED."
AND OUR COUNTRY'S FLAWED,
BECAUSE THEY WERE FLAWED.
BECAUSE WE'RE ALL FIGURING IT
OUT.
AND THERE'S LESSONS TO BE MINED
THERE.
>> Thompson: HEAR MORE FROM THE
CAST OF "HAMILTON," INCLUDING A
Q&A WITH THE SHOW'S CREATOR LIN-
MANUEL MIRANDA.
VISIT US ONLINE AT
pbs.org/newshour.
>> Thompson: TOMORROW, VOTERS IN
THE PHILIPPINES WILL CHOOSE A
NEW PRESIDENT.
THE FRONTRUNNER IS 71-YEAR-OLD
RODRIGO DUTERTE, WHOSE BRASH
STYLE HAS EARNED HIM COMPARISONS
TO DONALD TRUMP.
DUTERTE GAINED A TOUGH-ON-CRIME
REPUTATION AS THE LONG-TIME
MAYOR OF THE SOUTHERN PHILIPPINE
CITY OF DAVAO.
BUT HE'S BEEN ACCUSED BY HUMAN
RIGHTS GROUPS OF THE EXTRA-
JUDICIAL KILLINGS OF MORE THAN
1,000 PEOPLE.
DUTERTE HAS ALSO RAISED EYEBROWS
WITH HIS USE OF PROFANITY, A
JOKE ABOUT A GANG RAPE, AND A
COMMENT ABOUT KILLING HIS OWN
KIDS IF THEY EVER TOOK DRUGS."
REUTERS" REPORTER KAREN LEMA IS
COVERING THE ELECTION AND JOINS
ME NOW VIA SKYPE FROM THE
PHILIPPINES' CAPITAL OF MANILA.
SO, KAREN,
CAN YOU FIRST HELP PUT THIS IN
CONTEXT.
WHAT HAS THE MAIN ISSUES BEEN IN
THIS ELECTION?
>> YOU KNOW, YOU HAVE TO
UNDERSTAND THAT IN PHILIPPINE
POLITICS A FILIPINO VOTERS GIVE
MORE WEIGHT ON PERSONALITY
RATHER THAN THE POINTS OF THE
CANDIDATES.
THAT EXPLAINS WHY ROBERTO
DUTERTE, GIVEN THE APPROACH, AS
YOU CAN SEE THAT DUTERTE HAS WON
THE HEARTS OF THE VOTERS BECAUSE
OF THIS NO-NONSENSE STAND ON
CRIME AND CORRUPTION.
THAT HAS RESONATED WITH VOTERS,
THEY ARE VERY FRUSTRATED AND
DISAPPOINTED WITH THE
GOVERNMENT'S INABILITY TO
ADDRESS OR AT LEAST TRANSFORM
THE ECONOMIC GAINS, REAL GAINS
SUCH AS EXPANDING HIGHER PAYING
JOBS AND ADDRESSING PUBLIC
SERVICE AND IMPROVING MASS
TRANSIT AND TRAFFIC PROBLEMS.
AND POLITICAL ANALYSTS SAY THAT
HIS REFLECTION OF PEOPLE'S
DISCONTENT AND HIGH LEVEL OF
FRUSTRATION WITH THE POLITICAL
ELITE, WHICH THEY THINK IS ALSO
WEAK AND EFFECTIVE AND CORRUPT.
>> Thompson: 300,000 PEOPLE
ATTENDED HIS RALLIES, CAN YOU
JUST TALK ABOUT WHO IS
SUPPORTING HIM?
WHERE DOES HE DRAW HIS SUPPORT
FROM?
>> THEY'RE ALL ACROSS SOCIAL
DEMOGRAPHICS.
HIS APPEAL CUTS ACROSS CLASS A,
B, C, D AND E.
AND PEOPLE ARE CONTRIBUTING OUT
OF THEIR OWN POCKETS,
VOLUNTEERING TO CAMPAIGN FOR THE
MAYOR.
HIS APPEAL IS JUST ACROSS THE
BOARD.
>> Thompson: THE U.S. HAS
ANNOUNCED AN EXPANDED MILITARY
PRESENCE IN THE PHILIPPINES,
RECENTLY ANNOUNCED NORTH PATROLS
IN THE SOUTH CHINA SEA WHERE THE
PHILIPPINES HAVE HAD TEDDAL
DISPUTES WITH CHINA, CAN YOU
TALK ABOUT HOW THE OUTCOME OF
THIS ELECTION MIGHTY NEGLECT THE
TIM PEEPS RELATIONSHIP WITH THE
UNITED STATES?
IN.
>> TERMS OF FOREIGN POLICY, YET
TO HEAR THE CANDIDATES REALLY
LAY DOWN HOW THEIR FOREIGN
POLICY WOULD PAN OUT.
WHEN IT COMES TO THE U.S., I
DON'T THINK THESE CANDIDATES
REALLY DEVIATE FROM THE CURRENT
FOREIGN POLICY OF THE CURRENT
ADMINISTRATION, ALTHOUGH DID YOU
HEAR SOME RHETORIC FROM THE
MAYOR ABOUT THE POSSIBILITY OF
CUTTING TIES WITH THE UNITED
STATES AFTER THE U.S. AM
AMBASSADOR, BUT WE DON'T KNOW IF
WE'RE GOING TO TREAT IT OR TAKE
IT LITERALLY.
BUT THAT IS YET TO BE SEEN.
WE HAVE REALLY YET TO HEAR FROM
THEM WHAT THEIR FOREIGN POLICY
WILL BE.
>> Thompson: THANK YOU SO
MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SUNDAY.
>> Thompson: THE FRONTRUNNERS IN
THE PRESIDENTIAL RACE ARE AMPING
UP THEIR RHETORIC ABOUT EACH
OTHER.
AT RALLIES AND ON TWITTER,
PRESUMPTIVE REPUBLICAN NOMINEE
DONALD TRUMP IS CALLING FORMER
SECRETARY OF STATE HILLARY
CLINTON "CROOKED HILLARY."
TODAY ON NBC'S "MEET THE PRESS,"
HE WAS ASKED ABOUT HIS SHIFT
FROM HIS PAST FLATTERY OF HER.
>> BUT WHEN SOMEBODY SAYS,
THREE, FOUR, FIVE YEARS AGO,
"LET'S LOOK AT HILLARY CLINTON.
WHAT DO YOU THINK?"
I SAY, "SHE'S DOING GREAT."
I SAY EVERYBODY'S DOING GREAT.
THE FACT IS SHE HAS NOT DONE A
GOOD JOB.
WHEN I LOOK AT WHAT HAPPENED
WITH LIBYA, WHEN I LOOK AT WHAT
HAPPENED WITH BENGHAZI, WHEN YOU
LOOK AT THE MIGRATION.
WHEN YOU LOOK AT ALL OF THE
THINGS.
BUT I'M NOT LOOKING TO
CRITICIZE.
YOU CAN LOOK AT MANY POLITICIANS
THAT HAVEN'T DONE A GOOD JOB.
HOW ARE THEY DOING?
THEY'RE DOING JUST FINE.
I'M NOT LOOKING TO GET INTO WARS
WITH POLITICIANS BECAUSE I NEED
POLITICIANS.
>> Thompson: TRUMP ALSO SAID
TODAY TAXES FOR THE WEALTHY"
SHOULD GO UP," BUT INDIVIDUAL
STATES SHOULD DECIDE WHETHER TO
RAISE THEIR MINIMUM WAGE ABOVE
THE FEDERAL STANDARD OF $7.25 AN
HOUR.
CLINTON, WHO HAS STARTED CALLING
TRUMP THE "PRESUMPTUOUS"
NOMINEE, POINTED OUT TODAY SHE'S
WON NEARLY TWO MILLION MORE
VOTES IN DEMOCRATIC PRIMARIES
AND CAUCUSES THAN HE HAS IN
REPUBLICAN CONTESTS.
SHE WAS ASKED TODAY ON CBS'S"
FACE THE NATION" WHY SHE'S
CALLED TRUMP A "LOOSE CANNON."
>> I THINK THAT BEING A LOOSE
CANNON MEANS SAYING THAT OTHER
NATIONS SHOULD GO AHEAD AND
ACQUIRE NUCLEAR WEAPONS FOR
THEMSELVES WHEN THAT IS THE LAST
THING WE NEED TODAY.
BEING A LOOSE CANNON IS SAYING
WE SHOULD PULL OUT OF NATO THE
STRONGEST MILITARY ALLIANCE IN
THE HISTORY OF THE WORLD AND
SOMETHING THAT WE NEED TO
MODERNIZE BUT NOT ABANDON.
>> Thompson: THE NEXT
PRESIDENTIAL PRIMARIES ARE THIS
TUESDAY, IN NEBRASKA FOR THE
REPUBLICANS AND IN WEST VIRGINIA
FOR BOTH PARTIES.
>> Thompson: AND FINALLY ON
THIS MOTHER'S DAY JOIN THE
CONVERSATION ON OUR FACEBOOK
PAGE AT FACEBOOK.COM NEWSHOUR A
MOM WHO MADE A DIFFERENCE IN
YOUR LIFE.
ON THE "NEWSHOUR" TOMORROW COME
ALONG AS WE FOLLOW THE TRAIL OF
OUR ELECTRONIC WASTE.
DISCOVER HOW YOUR OLD COMPUTER
AND PRINTER THAT YOU DROPPED OFF
TO BE RECYCLED MAY NOT END UP
WHERE IT'S SUPPOSED TO.
AND THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION
OF PBS "NEWSHOUR WEEKEND" I'M
MEGAN THOMPSON, THANKS FOR
WATCHING.